cloud-topics: Add producer settings page (#1695)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/develop/pages/manage-topics/configure-producers-for-cloud-topics.adoc

= Configure Producers for Cloud Topics
:page-categories: Clients, Development
:description: Learn about producer configuration considerations for Cloud Topics.

> :page-topic-type: how-to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:page-topic-type: best-practices, how-to
```

:personas: streaming_developer, platform_admin

> :learning-objective-1: Identify producer configuration options to tune for Cloud Topics workloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:learning-objective-1: Apply producer configuration settings to maximize throughput for Cloud Topics
```

// tag::single-source[]

This page is specifically focused on client producer tuning for Cloud Topics. However, the general producer configuration guidance still applies. See xref:develop:produce-data/configure-producers.adoc[].

> == Producer Theoretical Throughput

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Overview
```

> The same principles that apply for standard topics also apply to Cloud Topics. To achieve good single-producer throughput, they become even more important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same usage principles and requirements that apply for standard topics also apply to Cloud Topics. To achieve good single-producer throughput, they become even more important.
```

> With idempotency enabled, Kafka's protocol allows only 5 in-flight requests at a time on a single broker connection. This imposes a tight limit on how much data can be in flight at a single time. Over high-latency links, this is already a problem for standard topics. With Cloud Topics, everything becomes a high-latency link due to the default 250ms batching behaviour of the broker, which reduces cloud storage costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With idempotency enabled, Kafka's protocol allows only five in-flight requests at a time on a single broker connection. This imposes a tight limit on how much data can be in flight at a single time. Over high-latency links, this is already a problem for standard topics. With Cloud Topics, everything becomes a high-latency link due to the default 250ms batching behavior of the broker, which reduces cloud storage costs.
```

> With idempotency enabled, Kafka's protocol allows only five in-flight requests at a time on a single broker connection. This imposes a tight limit on how much data can be in flight at a single time. Over high-latency links, this is already a problem for standard topics. With Cloud Topics, everything becomes a high-latency link due to the default 250ms batching behavior of the broker, which reduces cloud storage costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes how to tune the client producer for Cloud Topics (note that general producer configuration guidance still applies). See xref:develop:produce-data/configure-producers.adoc[].

With idempotency enabled, Kafka's protocol allows only five in-flight requests at a time on a single broker connection. This imposes a tight limit on how much data can be in flight at a single time. Over high-latency links, this is already a problem for standard topics. 

Cloud Topics use a 250ms batching interval at the broker to reduce cloud storage costs, which effectively makes every producer connection a high-latency link. Compared to standard topics, this changes producer tuning priorities. Configuring batch size, linger time, and request size correctly is critical for achieving good single-producer throughput. This section covers the key settings and example values for the most common client libraries.
```

Author: This completely changes what is being said? It's important to point out the in flight limitation here.

Reviewer: I revised this. Okay now @StephanDollberg ?

Author: yes perfect. Thank you!

> The maximum throughput for a single producer can be calculated as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calculate the maximum throughput for a single producer as follows:
```

[]
----
broker_count * max_in_flight * request_size / latency_seconds

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[,text]
----
broker_count * max_in_flight * request_size / latency_seconds
----
```

> with the following definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughput formula definitions:
```

* `broker_count`: The number of brokers in the cluster.

> * `max_in_flight`: The maximum number of in-flight requests on a single connection. With an idempotent producer, this is usually 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `max_in_flight`: The maximum number of in-flight requests on a single connection. With an idempotent producer, this is usually five.
```

> * `latency_seconds`: The latency of a single produce request. Assuming normal operation, this can be equated to the 250ms as described above. In practice, it will mostly be lower, as the timer starts with the first byte arriving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `latency_seconds`: The latency of a single produce request. Assuming normal operation, this can be equated to the 250ms as earlier. In practice, it is typically lower, as the timer starts with the first byte arriving.
```

> The `request_size` property is most important from a tuning perspective, because it's under client control while the other properties are effectively constants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `request_size`: The size of a single produce request. This is the primary tuning lever because the other factors are effectively constants.
```

> Finally, we have `request_size`. This is the most important property from a tuning perspective, as it's under client control while the others are effectively constants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `request_size` property is most important from a tuning perspective, because  it's under client control while the other properties are effectively constants.
```

> That being said, another easy way to increase throughput in the system is to just increase producer count, as that will naturally increase available parallelism in the system as more connections are opened to the brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another easy way to increase throughput in the system is to increase producer count, as doing so naturally increases available parallelism in the system as more connections are opened to the brokers.
```

> == Producer Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Producer settings
```

Most Kafka client libraries offer an assortment of tunables, with many properties impacting request size. The most important ones are described here, along with an example for the Kafka Java client, as well as caveats from other libraries.

> == Batches and requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Batches and requests
```

> Most Kafka client libraries offer a lot of tunables, with many properties affecting request size. We can't cover all of them, but will touch on the most important ones, give an example for the Kafka Java client, and point out a few gotchas in other libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Kafka client libraries offer as assortment of tunables, with many properties impacting request size. The most important ones are described here, along with an example for the Kafka Java client, as well as caveats from other libraries.
```

> == Batches and Requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Batches and requests
```

A Kafka produce request consists of one or more batches. A batch contains multiple records. Records mostly correspond to application-level messages as passed to the Kafka client API. At the broker level, the unit that matters is the batch, as everything happens at the batch level.

> As such, creating the largest possible batches is the most important factor for performance in general, and equally for Cloud Topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, creating the largest possible batches is the most important factor for performance in general, and equally for Cloud Topics.
```

> A request can contain multiple batches (with exceptions as per below), and hence makes the batch size not as important from a Cloud Topics perspective. However, this requires that a producer is producing to multiple partitions and that there are enough partitions per broker to fill the request with batches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A request can contain multiple batches (with exceptions as shown below), and hence makes the batch size not as important from a Cloud Topics perspective. However, this requires that a producer is producing to multiple partitions and that there are enough partitions per broker to fill the request with batches.
```

> A request can contain multiple batches (with exceptions as per below), and hence makes the batch size not as important from a Cloud Topics perspective. However, this requires that a producer is producing to multiple partitions and that there are enough partitions per broker to fill the request with batches.

Reviewer 2: The previous sentence was

> As such, creating the largest possible batches is the most important factor for performance in general, and equally for Cloud Topics.

And now we say this

> A request can contain multiple batches (with exceptions as per below), and hence makes the batch size not as important from a Cloud Topics perspective.

And these read to me as a bit contradictory?

Author: Yes you are right, they do read a bit like that. Both are true at the same time though haha. Let me try to rephrase a bit.

Author: I have rephrased it a bit.

Reviewer 2: lgtm

> == Java Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Java client
```

> == Java client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Java client
```

> For the Java client, we recommend at least the following settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Java client, Redpanda Data recommends the following as minimal settings:
```

[cols="1,1",options="header"]
|===
| Setting | Recommended value

| `linger.ms`
| `10ms`

| `batch.size`
| `131072`

| `max.request.size`

> | `1048576 (default)`

Reviewer 2: these feel a bit small, no? i guess these are minimums?

Author: I mean 1MB is plenty but it obviously depends on so many things which is why these blanket recommendations are hard. I don't want to go higher than needed because of the other second order effects of large requests in regards to memory reservation/starvation.

Reviewer 2: Oh I meant the 128kb size. But yeh, I'm good with whatever!

|===

> As per the above formula, with a basic three-broker setup and enough partitions, one can achieve a maximum throughput of ~65 MB/s per producer. If more throughput is needed on a single producer, it's recommended to further increase batch and max request size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the preceding formula, with a basic three-broker setup and enough partitions, you can achieve a maximum throughput of ~65 MB/s per producer. If more throughput is needed on a single producer, increase batch and max request size.
```

> Note that while it's recommended to set `linger.ms` to a higher acceptable value, it is not that important for Cloud Topics, given that as soon as there are 5 requests in flight, messages will be force batched even after crossing the `linger.ms` threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while it's recommended to set `linger.ms` to a higher acceptable value, it is not so important for Cloud Topics, because as soon as there are five requests in flight, messages are force batched even after crossing the `linger.ms` threshold.
```

> == librdkafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== librdkafka
```

> librdkafka is a commonly used Kafka C library. However, it's also the backing library for many other Kafka clients like confluent-kafka-python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
librdkafka is a commonly-used Kafka C library. However, it's also the backing library for many other Kafka clients like confluent-kafka-python.
```

> Unfortunately, it has one deficiency in contrast to other Kafka client libraries in that it only allows a single batch in a produce request. This massively cuts down on how much data is packed into a single request. Hence, it's important to increase `batch.size` to even higher values, as it will effectively be the limiting factor. librdkafka uses a default of 1MB, which allows for decent throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that it has a deficiency in contrast to other Kafka client libraries: it only allows a single batch in a produce request. This massively cuts down on how much data is packed into a single request. Hence, it's important to increase `batch.size` to even higher values, as it will effectively be the limiting factor. librdkafka uses a default of 1MB, which typically allows for decent throughput.
```

> == Note on idempotency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== idempotency considerations
```

> Disabling idempotency will avoid the in-flight limitation and hence allows for vastly increasing the number of concurrently in-flight requests and throughput. However, running without idempotency can result in duplicate and out-of-order messages, which for most applications is a problem, and hence we don't recommend it. In some cases where message requirements are fairly lax, it can be a viable alternative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disabling idempotency allows you to avoid the in-flight limitation and vastly increases the number of concurrent in-flight requests and throughput. However, running without idempotency can result in duplicate and out-of-order messages, which for most applications is a problem, and is not recommended. In cases where message requirements are fairly lax, it can be a viable alternative.
```

With idempotency enabled, Kafka's protocol allows only five in-flight requests at a time on a single broker connection. This imposes a tight limit on how much data can be in flight at a single time. Over high-latency links, this is already a problem for standard topics. With Cloud Topics, everything becomes a high-latency link due to the default 250ms batching behavior of the broker, which reduces cloud storage costs.

Calculate the maximum throughput for a single producer as follows:

[]
----
broker_count * max_in_flight * request_size / latency_seconds
----

Throughput formula definitions:

* `broker_count`: The number of brokers in the cluster.
* `max_in_flight`: The maximum number of in-flight requests on a single connection. With an idempotent producer, this is usually five.
* `latency_seconds`: The latency of a single produce request. Assuming normal operation, this can be equated to the 250ms as earlier. In practice, it is typically lower, as the timer starts with the first byte arriving.

The `request_size` property is most important from a tuning perspective, because it's under client control while the other properties are effectively constants.

> Another easy way to increase throughput in the system is to increase producer count, as doing so naturally increases available parallelism in the system as more connections are opened to the brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to increase throughput in the system is to increase producer count, as doing so naturally increases available parallelism in the system as more connections are opened to the brokers.
```

== Producer settings

> Most Kafka client libraries offer an assortment of tunables, with many properties impacting request size. The most important ones are described here, along with an example for the Kafka Java client, as well as caveats from other libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Kafka client libraries offer an assortment of tunables, with many properties impacting request size. The most important ones are described here, along with an example for the Kafka Java client, along with caveats from other libraries.
```

== Batches and requests

A Kafka produce request consists of one or more batches. A batch contains multiple records. Records mostly correspond to application-level messages as passed to the Kafka client API. At the broker level, the unit that matters is the batch, as everything happens at the batch level.

> Hence, creating the largest possible batches is the most important factor for performance in general, and equally for Cloud Topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, creating the largest possible batches is the most important factor for performance in general, and equally applies for Cloud Topics.
```

> A request can contain multiple batches, this can sometimes alleviate the need for massive batches. However, this requires that a producer is producing to multiple partitions and that there are enough partitions per broker to fill the request with batches. As explained in the <<java-client,Java client>> section, there are also exceptions to this in some client libraries and hence shouldn't be relied on blindly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A request can contain multiple batches, this can sometimes alleviate the need for massive batches. However, this requires that a producer is producing to multiple partitions and that there are enough partitions per broker to fill the request with batches. As explained in <<java-client,Java client>>, there are also exceptions to this in some client libraries, so you should not blindly rely on them.
```

[#java-client]
== Java client

For the Java client, Redpanda Data recommends the following as minimal settings:

[cols="1,1",options="header"]
|===
| Setting | Recommended value

| `linger.ms`
| `10ms`

| `batch.size`

> | `131072`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `131072` bytes
```

Author: This is this config value. So we shouldn't add units or whatever.

| `max.request.size`

> | `1048576 (default)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `1048576` bytes (default)
```

Author: same as above.

|===

As shown in the preceding formula, with a basic three-broker setup and enough partitions, you can achieve a maximum throughput of ~65 MB/s per producer. If more throughput is needed on a single producer, increase batch and max request size.

> Note that while it's recommended to set `linger.ms` to a higher acceptable value, it is not so important for Cloud Topics, because as soon as there are five requests in flight, messages are force batched even after crossing the `linger.ms` threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting `linger.ms` to a higher value is recommended, but it's less critical for Cloud Topics because as soon as there are five requests in flight, messages are force-batched even after crossing the `linger.ms` threshold.
```

== librdkafka

librdkafka is a commonly-used Kafka C library. However, it's also the backing library for many other Kafka clients like confluent-kafka-python.

> Note that it has a deficiency in contrast to other Kafka client libraries: it only allows a single batch in a produce request. This massively cuts down on how much data is packed into a single request. Hence, it's important to increase `batch.size` to even higher values, as it will effectively be the limiting factor. librdkafka uses a default of 1MB, which typically allows for decent throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
librdkafka only allows a single batch in a produce request, unlike most other Kafka client libraries. This significantly cuts down how much data is packed into a single request. Thus, it's important to increase `batch.size` to even higher values, as it is effectively the limiting factor. librdkafka has a default of 1MB, which typically allows for decent throughput.
```
